proposal: Expand the PVC's initial capacity based on the largest capacity in specified PVCs. (#174)
topolvm/pvc-autoresizer: docs/proposals/resize-when-creating-by-group.md

## Summary

Expand the PVC's initial capacity based on the largest capacity in specified PVCs.

### Motivation

One use case for pvc-autoresizer is automatically extending a PV/PVC for multiple Pod/PV pairings, such as a MySQL cluster.

> In such a cluster, if a Pod/PV fails and a PV/PVC is rebuilt for the restore process, a PV is created based on the PVC template. Even if a PV of the same size as the others is actually needed, a PV of the template's capacity is created, resulting in a case where the restore process stops due to insufficient capacity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such a cluster, if a Pod/PV fails and a PV/PVC is rebuilt by the restore process, a PV is created based on the PVC template. Even if a PV of the same size as the others is actually needed, a PV of the template's capacity is created. As a result, the restore process stops due to insufficient capacity.
```

> One use case for pvc-autoresizer is automatically expanding a PV/PVC for multiple Pod/PV pairs, such as a MySQL cluster.
> In such a cluster, if a Pod/PV fails and a PV/PVC is rebuilt by the restore process, a PV is created based on the PVC template. Even if a PV of the same size as the others is actually needed, a PV of the template's capacity is created. As a result, the restore process stops due to insufficient capacity.
> 
> To solve this problem, we are planning to add a new feature to create a PV/PVC with sufficient capacity when PVCs of the same group already exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes we needs to resize multiple PVCs at once. It typicall happens in StatefulSet. Here is the examples in MySQL clusters created by [moco](https://github.com/cybozu-go/moco).

1. Moco creates a StatefulSet to manage a MySQL cluster. In addition, a PVC is consumed per one instance(pod). Let assume the initial volume size, which is written in VolumeClaimTemplate, is 100GiB.
2. These PVCs has expanded to 200GiB according to the growth of DB.
3. One instance dies. Then a new pod and the corresponding instance is created to fill a vacancy.
4. The new PVC, which is consumed by the new instance is created. In this case, the size of the new PVC is not 200GiB, but 100GiB.
5. The data clone to the existing instances to the new instance might fail due to the lack of volume size.

This proposal is to resolve the above-mentioend problem.
```

- Provide the ability to expand the PVC's initial capacity based on the largest capacity in specified PVCs.
- The PVC for determining capacity should be user-selectable.

> - [moco](https://github.com/cybozu-go/moco) checks the PV capacity at the beginning of the restore process. It should be able to handle such cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [MOCO](https://github.com/cybozu-go/moco) checks the PV capacity at the beginning of the restore process. It should be able to handle such cases.
```

By the way, I think the proposal should be general, and should not be too specific to MOCO, even though our motivation comes from it. It might be better to remove this item from the goals.

Reviewer: @llamerada-jp 
> By the way, I think the proposal should be general, and should not be too specific to MOCO, even though our motivation comes from it. It might be better to remove this item from the goals.

How do you think about my comment above?

Author: @peng225 
You are correct. I change the sentence of `Goals` and `Decision outcome`. Would you please check again?

## Proposal

Rules for grouping & initial sizing

> - If creating a PVC has a `resize.topolvm.io/pre-resize-group-by` annotation and the label specified in the annotation exists, existing PVCs with matching values are determined to be in the same group.

Reviewer 3: IMHO, the name `resize.topolvm.io/pre-resize-group-by` is ambiguous because it is not clear what pre refers to.

Author: @peng225 @daichimukai @satoru-takeuchi 

How about `resize.topolvm.io/init-resize-group-by` or `resize.topolvm.io/initial-resize-group-by` ?

Reviewer: I prefer `resize.topolvm.io/initial-resize-group-by`.

Reviewer 3: LGTM

Reviewer 2: I agree with @peng225 and @daichimukai

- If no PVCs are determined to be in the same group, or if the capacity of creating PVC is larger than existing any PVC in the same group, the capacity of the original PVC is used as is.

Examples are given below.

```yaml
### existing PVCs (excerpted)
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: pvc-x-1
  labels:
    label-hoge: group-x
  annotations:

>     resize.topolvm.io/pre-resize-group-by: label-hoge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    resize.topolvm.io/pre-resize-group-by: label-foo
```
"hoge" is Japanese word, maybe.

spec:
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 20Gi

kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: pvc-x-2
  labels:
    label-hoge: group-x
  annotations:
    resize.topolvm.io/pre-resize-group-by: label-hoge
spec:
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 16Gi

kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: pvc-y-1
  labels:
    label-hoge: group-y
  annotations:
    resize.topolvm.io/pre-resize-group-by: label-hoge
spec:
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 30Gi
```

> When creating the following new PVC, `pvc-x-1` and `pvc-x-2` with `label-hoge: group-x` are determined to be in the same group, and `pvc-y-1` is determined to be in a different group. Therefore, the PVC is created with **20Gi** based on `pvc-x-1`, which has the largest capacity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating the following new PVC, `pvc-x-1` and `pvc-x-2` with `label-hoge: group-x` are considered to be in the same group, and `pvc-y-1` is not. Therefore, the PVC is created with **20Gi** based on `pvc-x-1`, which has the largest capacity in the group.
```

> When creating the following new PVC, `pvc-x-1` and `pvc-x-2` with `label-hoge: group-x` are considered to be in the same group, and `pvc-y-1` is not. Therefore, the PVC is created with **20Gi** based on `pvc-x-1`, which has the largest capacity in the group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating the following new PVC, `pvc-x-1` and `pvc-x-2` with `label-foobar: group-x` are considered to be in the same group, and `pvc-y-1` is not. Therefore, the PVC is created with **20Gi** based on `pvc-x-1`, which has the largest capacity in the group.
```

kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: pvc-x-3
  labels:
    label-hoge: group-x
  annotations:
    resize.topolvm.io/pre-resize-group-by: label-hoge
spec:
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 10Gi
```

> When creating the following new PVC, `pvc-y-1` with `label-hoge: group-y` is a candidate, but since the new PVC's size(50Gi) is larger than the existing(30Gi), the PVC will be created with **50Gi**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating the following new PVC, `pvc-y-1` with `label-hoge: group-y` is in the same group. However, since the new PVC's size(50Gi) is larger than the existing one(30Gi), the PVC is created with **50Gi**.
```

> When creating the following new PVC, `pvc-y-1` with `label-hoge: group-y` is in the same group. However, since the new PVC's size(50Gi) is larger than the existing one(30Gi), the PVC is created with **50Gi**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating the following new PVC, `pvc-y-1` with `label-foobar: group-y` is in the same group. However, since the new PVC's size(50Gi) is larger than the existing one(30Gi), the PVC is created with **50Gi**.
```

kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: pvc-y-2
  labels:
    label-hoge: group-y
  annotations:
    resize.topolvm.io/pre-resize-group-by: label-hoge
spec:
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 50Gi
```

### How to use

- Add `resize.topolvm.io/pre-resize-group-by` annotation to the PVC template to which you want to apply the feature.
- In most cases, annotations and labels are not added to PVCs that have already been created based on a PVC template. In such cases, it is necessary to manually add `resize.topolvm.io/pre-resize-group-by` annotation to existing PVCs in addition to the PVC template.

## Design details

> Implementation method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Option A) use mutating webhook for PVC

Pros:

> - PVCs are created with the required capacity specified from the beginning, even a restore program that checks the free capacity of the volume will not cause problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A restore program that checks the free capacity of the volume will not cause problems.
```

(Perhaps, I do not fully understand your intention.)

> - PVCs are created with the required capacity specified from the beginning, so they will not become unscalable later due to insufficient capacity when the capacity per node is had, as is the case of TopoLVM.

Reviewer: Sorry, but I could not understand this line.
Especially, what do you mean by saying "when the capacity per node is had"?

Reviewer: How about changing the line as follows?
```suggestion
- We do not need to worry about expansion failure after scheduling PVs because new PVC is created with the sufficient capacity.
```

Cons:
- In order to provide webhook features, additional configuration of mutating webhook and svc is required besides the development of the program.

### Option B) use reconcile loop for PVC

Pros:
- pvc-autoresizer already has a custom controller that monitors PVCs, so the functionality may be achieved with a few modifications.

Cons:
- A restore program that performs a free space check of the volume when using PVC may cause an error due to insufficient space before expanding PV/PVC.
- In TopoLVM, there may be cases in which PVs created cannot be expanded due to insufficient node capacity.

### Decision outcome

> We adopt Option A. We have already found out that moco restores check the free space of PVCs. Therefore, the restore does not work well with Option B. It is possible that other programs may behave the same way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We adopt Option A. We have already found out that MOCO's restore process checks the free space of PVCs. Therefore, the restore does not work well with Option B. Other programs may behave in the same way.
```
